
PMC - PMC7067148
IS  - 1925-8348 (Electronic)
VI  - 23
IP  - 1
DP  - 2020 Mar
TI  - Canadian Guidelines on Opioid Use Disorder Among Older Adults.
PG  - 123-34
AB  - Background: In Canada, rates of hospital admission from opioid overdose are
      higher for older adults (≥ 65) than younger adults, and opioid use disorder (OUD)
      is a growing concern. In response, Health Canada commissioned the Canadian
      Coalition of Seniors’ Mental Health to create guidelines for the prevention,
      screening, assessment, and treatment of OUD in older adults. Methods: A
      systematic review of English language literature from 2008–2018 regarding OUD in 
      adults was conducted. Previously published guidelines were evaluated using AGREE 
      II, and key guidelines updated using ADAPTE method, by drawing on current
      literature. Recommendations were created and assessed using the GRADE method.
      Results: Thirty-two recommendations were created. Prevention recommendations: it 
      is key to prioritize non-pharmacological and non-opioid strategies to treat acute
      and chronic noncancer pain. Assessment recommendations: a comprehensive
      assessment is important to help discern contributions of other medical
      conditions. Treatment recommendations: buprenorphine is first line for both
      withdrawal management and maintenance therapy, while methadone, slow-release oral
      morphine, or naltrexone can be used as alternatives under certain circumstances; 
      non-pharmacological treatments should be offered as an integrated part of care.
      Conclusion: These guidelines provide practical and timely clinical
      recommendations on the prevention, assessment, and treatment of OUD in older
      adults within the Canadian context.
FAU - Rieb, Launette M.
AU  - Rieb LM
AD  - Department of Family Practice, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC
FAU - Samaan, Zainab
AU  - Samaan Z
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON
FAU - Furlan, Andrea D.
AU  - Furlan AD
AD  - Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
FAU - Rabheru, Kiran
AU  - Rabheru K
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON
FAU - Feldman, Sid
AU  - Feldman S
AD  - Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
FAU - Hung, Lillian
AU  - Hung L
AD  - Canadian Gerontological Nurses Association, Toronto, ON
FAU - Budd, George
AU  - Budd G
AD  - Clinical Pharmacist, Vancouver, BC
FAU - Coleman, Douglas
AU  - Coleman D
AD  - Family Physician (in private practice), Comox, BC
CN  - Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health
LA  - eng
PT  - Journal Article
DEP - 20200330
TA  - Can Geriatr J
JT  - Canadian Geriatrics Journal
AID - 10.5770/cgj.23.420 [doi]
AID - cgj-8-123 [pii]
SO  - Can Geriatr J. 2020 Mar 30;23(1):123-34. doi:10.5770/cgj.23.420.

PMC - PMC7067152
IS  - 1925-8348 (Electronic)
VI  - 23
IP  - 1
DP  - 2020 Mar
TI  - Canadian Guidelines on Alcohol Use Disorder Among Older Adults.
PG  - 143-8
AB  - Background: Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is an increasingly common,
      under-recognized, and under-treated health concern in older adults. Its
      prevalence is expected to reach unprecedented levels as the Canadian population
      ages. In response, Health Canada commissioned the Canadian Coalition of Seniors’ 
      Mental Health to create guidelines for the prevention, screening, assessment, and
      treatment of AUD in older adults. Methods: A systematic review of English
      language literature from 2008–2018 regarding AUD in adults was conducted.
      Previously published guidelines were evaluated using AGREE II, and key guidelines
      updated using ADAPTE method by drawing on current literature. Recommendations
      were created and assessed using the GRADE method. Results: Twenty-two
      recommendations were created. Prevention recommendations: Best advice for older
      adults who choose to drink is to limit intake to well below the national Low-Risk
      Alcohol Drinking Guidelines. Screening recommendations: Alcohol consumption
      should be reviewed and discussed on an annual basis by primary care providers.
      This type of discussion needs to be normalized and approached in a simple,
      neutral, straight-forward manner. Assessment recommendations: Positive screens
      for AUD should be followed by a comprehensive assessment. Once more details are
      obtained an individualized treatment plan can be recommended, negotiated, and
      implemented. Treatment recommendations: AUD falls on a spectrum of mild,
      moderate, and severe. It can also be complicated by concurrent mental health,
      physical, or social issues, especially in older adults. Naltrexone and
      Acamprosate pharmacotherapies can be used for the treatment of AUD in older
      adults, as individually indicated. Psychosocial treatment and support should be
      offered as part of a comprehensive treatment plan. Conclusion: These guidelines
      provide practical and timely clinical recommendations on the prevention,
      assessment, and treatment of AUD in older adults within the Canadian context.
FAU - Butt, Peter R.
AU  - Butt PR
AD  - Department of Family Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK
FAU - White-Campbell, Marilyn
AU  - White-Campbell M
AD  - Baycrest Health Sciences, North York, ON
FAU - Canham, Sarah
AU  - Canham S
AD  - College of Social Work, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
FAU - Johnston, Ann Dowsett
AU  - Johnston AD
FAU - Indome, Eunice O.
AU  - Indome EO
AD  - School of Public Health and Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON
FAU - Purcell, Bonnie
AU  - Purcell B
AD  - London Health Sciences Centre, London, On
FAU - Tung, Jennifer
AU  - Tung J
AD  - Grand River Hospital, Kitchener, ON
FAU - Van Bussel, Lisa
AU  - Van Bussel L
AD  - Department of Psychology, Western University, London, ON
CN  - Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health
LA  - eng
PT  - Journal Article
DEP - 20200330
TA  - Can Geriatr J
JT  - Canadian Geriatrics Journal
AID - 10.5770/cgj.23.425 [doi]
AID - cgj-8-143 [pii]
SO  - Can Geriatr J. 2020 Mar 30;23(1):143-8. doi:10.5770/cgj.23.425.
