
PMC - PMC7067148
IS  - 1925-8348 (Electronic)
VI  - 23
IP  - 1
DP  - 2020 Mar
TI  - Canadian Guidelines on Opioid Use Disorder Among Older Adults.
PG  - 123-34
AB  - Background: In Canada, rates of hospital admission from opioid overdose are
      higher for older adults (≥ 65) than younger adults, and opioid use disorder (OUD)
      is a growing concern. In response, Health Canada commissioned the Canadian
      Coalition of Seniors’ Mental Health to create guidelines for the prevention,
      screening, assessment, and treatment of OUD in older adults. Methods: A
      systematic review of English language literature from 2008–2018 regarding OUD in 
      adults was conducted. Previously published guidelines were evaluated using AGREE 
      II, and key guidelines updated using ADAPTE method, by drawing on current
      literature. Recommendations were created and assessed using the GRADE method.
      Results: Thirty-two recommendations were created. Prevention recommendations: it 
      is key to prioritize non-pharmacological and non-opioid strategies to treat acute
      and chronic noncancer pain. Assessment recommendations: a comprehensive
      assessment is important to help discern contributions of other medical
      conditions. Treatment recommendations: buprenorphine is first line for both
      withdrawal management and maintenance therapy, while methadone, slow-release oral
      morphine, or naltrexone can be used as alternatives under certain circumstances; 
      non-pharmacological treatments should be offered as an integrated part of care.
      Conclusion: These guidelines provide practical and timely clinical
      recommendations on the prevention, assessment, and treatment of OUD in older
      adults within the Canadian context.
FAU - Rieb, Launette M.
AU  - Rieb LM
AD  - Department of Family Practice, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC
FAU - Samaan, Zainab
AU  - Samaan Z
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON
FAU - Furlan, Andrea D.
AU  - Furlan AD
AD  - Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
FAU - Rabheru, Kiran
AU  - Rabheru K
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON
FAU - Feldman, Sid
AU  - Feldman S
AD  - Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
FAU - Hung, Lillian
AU  - Hung L
AD  - Canadian Gerontological Nurses Association, Toronto, ON
FAU - Budd, George
AU  - Budd G
AD  - Clinical Pharmacist, Vancouver, BC
FAU - Coleman, Douglas
AU  - Coleman D
AD  - Family Physician (in private practice), Comox, BC
CN  - Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health
LA  - eng
PT  - Journal Article
DEP - 20200330
TA  - Can Geriatr J
JT  - Canadian Geriatrics Journal
AID - 10.5770/cgj.23.420 [doi]
AID - cgj-8-123 [pii]
SO  - Can Geriatr J. 2020 Mar 30;23(1):123-34. doi:10.5770/cgj.23.420.

PMC - PMC7067147
IS  - 1925-8348 (Electronic)
VI  - 23
IP  - 1
DP  - 2020 Mar
TI  - Canadian Guidelines on Benzodiazepine Receptor Agonist Use Disorder Among Older
      Adults Title.
PG  - 116-22
AB  - Background: Benzodiazepine receptor agonist (BZRA) use disorder among older
      adults is a relatively common and challenging clinical condition. Method: The
      Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health, with financial support from Health
      Canada, has produced evidence-based guidelines on the prevention, identification,
      assessment, and management of this form of substance use disorder. Results:
      Inappropriate use of BZRAs should be avoided by considering non-pharmacological
      approaches to the management of late life insomnia, anxiety, and other common
      indications for the use of BZRA. Older persons should only be prescribed BZRAs
      after they are fully informed of alternatives, benefits, and risks associated
      with their use. Clinicians should have a high index of suspicion for the presence
      of BZRA use disorders. The full version of these guidelines can be accessed at
      www.ccsmh.ca Conclusions: A person-centred, stepped care approach utilizing
      gradual dose reductions should be used in the management of BZRA use disorder.
FAU - Conn, David K.
AU  - Conn DK
AD  - Baycrest Health Sciences, North York, ON
FAU - Hogan, David B.
AU  - Hogan DB
AD  - Brenda Strafford Centre on Aging, O’Brien Institute for Public Health, Cumming
      School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB
FAU - Amdam, Lori
AU  - Amdam L
AD  - Canadian Coalition for Seniors Mental Health, Markham, ON
FAU - Cassidy, Keri-Leigh
AU  - Cassidy KL
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS
FAU - Cordell, Peter
AU  - Cordell P
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON
FAU - Frank, Christopher
AU  - Frank C
AD  - Department of Family Medicine, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON
FAU - Gardner, David
AU  - Gardner D
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS
FAU - Goldhar, Morris
AU  - Goldhar M
FAU - Ho, Joanne M-W
AU  - Ho JMW
AD  - Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON
FAU - Kitamura, Christopher
AU  - Kitamura C
AD  - Baycrest Health Sciences, North York, ON
FAU - Vasil, Nancy
AU  - Vasil N
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC
LA  - eng
PT  - Journal Article
DEP - 20200330
TA  - Can Geriatr J
JT  - Canadian Geriatrics Journal
AID - 10.5770/cgj.23.419 [doi]
AID - cgj-8-116 [pii]
SO  - Can Geriatr J. 2020 Mar 30;23(1):116-22. doi:10.5770/cgj.23.419.

PMC - PMC7067152
IS  - 1925-8348 (Electronic)
VI  - 23
IP  - 1
DP  - 2020 Mar
TI  - Canadian Guidelines on Alcohol Use Disorder Among Older Adults.
PG  - 143-8
AB  - Background: Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is an increasingly common,
      under-recognized, and under-treated health concern in older adults. Its
      prevalence is expected to reach unprecedented levels as the Canadian population
      ages. In response, Health Canada commissioned the Canadian Coalition of Seniors’ 
      Mental Health to create guidelines for the prevention, screening, assessment, and
      treatment of AUD in older adults. Methods: A systematic review of English
      language literature from 2008–2018 regarding AUD in adults was conducted.
      Previously published guidelines were evaluated using AGREE II, and key guidelines
      updated using ADAPTE method by drawing on current literature. Recommendations
      were created and assessed using the GRADE method. Results: Twenty-two
      recommendations were created. Prevention recommendations: Best advice for older
      adults who choose to drink is to limit intake to well below the national Low-Risk
      Alcohol Drinking Guidelines. Screening recommendations: Alcohol consumption
      should be reviewed and discussed on an annual basis by primary care providers.
      This type of discussion needs to be normalized and approached in a simple,
      neutral, straight-forward manner. Assessment recommendations: Positive screens
      for AUD should be followed by a comprehensive assessment. Once more details are
      obtained an individualized treatment plan can be recommended, negotiated, and
      implemented. Treatment recommendations: AUD falls on a spectrum of mild,
      moderate, and severe. It can also be complicated by concurrent mental health,
      physical, or social issues, especially in older adults. Naltrexone and
      Acamprosate pharmacotherapies can be used for the treatment of AUD in older
      adults, as individually indicated. Psychosocial treatment and support should be
      offered as part of a comprehensive treatment plan. Conclusion: These guidelines
      provide practical and timely clinical recommendations on the prevention,
      assessment, and treatment of AUD in older adults within the Canadian context.
FAU - Butt, Peter R.
AU  - Butt PR
AD  - Department of Family Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK
FAU - White-Campbell, Marilyn
AU  - White-Campbell M
AD  - Baycrest Health Sciences, North York, ON
FAU - Canham, Sarah
AU  - Canham S
AD  - College of Social Work, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
FAU - Johnston, Ann Dowsett
AU  - Johnston AD
FAU - Indome, Eunice O.
AU  - Indome EO
AD  - School of Public Health and Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON
FAU - Purcell, Bonnie
AU  - Purcell B
AD  - London Health Sciences Centre, London, On
FAU - Tung, Jennifer
AU  - Tung J
AD  - Grand River Hospital, Kitchener, ON
FAU - Van Bussel, Lisa
AU  - Van Bussel L
AD  - Department of Psychology, Western University, London, ON
CN  - Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health
LA  - eng
PT  - Journal Article
DEP - 20200330
TA  - Can Geriatr J
JT  - Canadian Geriatrics Journal
AID - 10.5770/cgj.23.425 [doi]
AID - cgj-8-143 [pii]
SO  - Can Geriatr J. 2020 Mar 30;23(1):143-8. doi:10.5770/cgj.23.425.

PMC - PMC7067149
IS  - 1925-8348 (Electronic)
VI  - 23
IP  - 1
DP  - 2020 Mar
TI  - Canadian Guidelines on Cannabis Use Disorder Among Older Adults.
PG  - 135-42
AB  - Background: Cannabis Use Disorder (CUD) is an emerging and diverse challenge
      among older adults. Methods: The Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health,
      with financial support from Health Canada, has produced evidence-based guidelines
      on the prevention, identification, assessment, and treatment of this form of
      substance use disorder. Conclusions: Older adults may develop CUD in the setting 
      of recreational and even medical use. Clinicians should remain vigilant for the
      detection of CUD, and they should be aware of strategies for prevention and
      managing its emergence and consequences The full version of these guidelines can 
      be accessed at www.ccsmh.ca.
FAU - Bertram, Jonathan R.
AU  - Bertram JR
AD  - Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON
FAU - Porath, Amy
AU  - Porath A
AD  - Canadian Centre for Substance Use and Addiction, Ottawa, On
FAU - Seitz, Dallas
AU  - Seitz D
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, Hotchkiss Brain Institute and O’Brien Institute for
      Public Health, Cumming School of Medicine; University of Calgary, Calgary, AB
FAU - Kalant, Harold
AU  - Kalant H
AD  - Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON
FAU - Krishnamoorthy, Ashok
AU  - Krishnamoorthy A
AD  - Department of Psychiatry, University of British Colombia, Vancouver, BC
FAU - Nickerson, Jason
AU  - Nickerson J
AD  - Centre for Health Law, Policy and Ethics, Faculty of Law, University of Ottawa,
      Ottawa, ON
FAU - Sidhu, Amanjot
AU  - Sidhu A
AD  - Division of Geriatric Medicine, Hamilton Health Sciences, Hamilton, ON
FAU - Smith, Andra
AU  - Smith A
AD  - Bruyère Research Institute, Ottawa, ON
FAU - Teed, Rand
AU  - Teed R
CN  - Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health
LA  - eng
PT  - Journal Article
DEP - 20200330
TA  - Can Geriatr J
JT  - Canadian Geriatrics Journal
AID - 10.5770/cgj.23.424 [doi]
AID - cgj-8-135 [pii]
SO  - Can Geriatr J. 2020 Mar 30;23(1):135-42. doi:10.5770/cgj.23.424.
